---
title: models
date: 2020-01-14
---
We are story making creatures. We make sense of the world with stories. From the day we are born to the day we die, we constantly make stories, consume stories, tell stories, live in stories. There are accurate stories and inaccurate stories. Useful stories and useless stories. Shared and personal stories. Some stories come with justifications, some are things we convince ourselves of without any reason. Some stories are unconscious or barely conscious. But in the end, we couldn't function without the constant stories our minds conjure up. 

Those stories are our models of the world. We need stories to understand the world, to understand each other, and to act in the world. 

We love our stories, even if they make us suffer. We get so used to some of the stories, we can't shake them anymore, even if they are hurting us. 

We are story making creatures. We are model making creatures. We constantly create stories about the world around us. Those stories are the models we use to understand the world, predict and act in the world. Some of stories are true. Some of those stories are wrong. Either way, stories are elaborated in our heads that structure our relation to the world. These stories that serve as models are very similar to the models in the field of machine learning. There too, machine learn mathematical models from data, and use those models to predict outcomes or act in the world (think self-driving cars). We could say that the mathematical model is a story that the machine makes up to understand its environment and survive in it. Just like for humans, some of the models in machine learning apply really well to only some situations, or not so well, but to many situations. 

Language

The stories can be somewhat arbitrary. After many years, research has shown that we don’t clearly remember things, yet we have stories in our heads about how it was, or what happened. Those stories, even if wrong, can still serve a purpose in our psyche, make us happy or sad, be convenient excuses, lies that make us appear in some desirable light in social settings, and that we come to really believe about ourselves. 

Science is also a big story we have elaborated about the world, couched in the language of mathematics, just because that language is what is convenient for the task of science. The story in science has the specificity that it is optimized for correct action in the world. Physics does not just tell any arbitrary story about how apples fall from trees. It tells the story that works best to explain as many cases of gravitational interaction as possible, and as precisely as possible, and it comes with a justification through experimentation, contact with reality. 

Psychology conjures up stories about how the human mind works, and there are many different types of stories, from Freud to many contemporary branches. Are these stories true? It can happen in psychotherapy to come to an impasse, where all the possible explanations and insights about someone’s past appear arbitrary. Is this story about how my childhood was actually true? I don’t really remember it clearly. Could it really have affected me that much? But that doesn’t matter, as long as I elect that story to the constitutive story for the person I want to be today. True or false, we need stories, we consume stories, use stories, make up stories, exchange stories all the time. The psychotic also has stories in his head, he is trying to make sense of the world, but for some reason his stories are not shared with others. They are still useful to him to structure and understand the world. Of course, those stories are also tied to our biology, since there are such strong connections between our minds and our bodies (taking drugs, medicinal or otherwise, can alter who you are). It goes both ways: our bodies have a bearing on what stories come up in our minds, and via stories in our minds, we can to some extent influence what goes on in our bodies. 

Mathematics tells us a different kind of story, where this time the story is not about what happens in Nature, but about objects that we can conjure up in our minds and obey rules (of logic) that are satisfactory to our minds. This time, the justification for this kind of knowledge comes from adherence to some basic rules of logic via proofs. 

Religion tells us stories backed by faith, and there are many religions, dead ones, many alive ones, and new ones created all the time. People need and crave religious stories for various reasons, but at the bottom, the religious stories put some structure on the world around the believer and therefore help him to be, to act, and to survive in the world.

All those stories are the equivalent in our brains of the models that machine learning builds in computers. The stories in our minds may even be built the same way: by observing patterns, co-occurences in time and space. From these regularities, we abstract out models, a line that stands in for a series of points in machine learning, a story about gravity causing apples to fall, or a story about an archetype in Jungian psychology, the archetype serving as a model to summarize phenomena that usually happen in humans. It’s all stories one way or another, some that apply more or less well to the world, and make us more or less efficient in the world, and that is the only thing that matters about all these stories: whether they are perceived to be useful or not. Whether they are “true” or not is secondary, and maybe not even a question that should be asked, once we recognize that we cannot but constantly make stories. That’s what a human brain is about: make stories to enhance survival, model the world around in order to survive in it. 

Even if the stories are arbitrary, we can elect to believe some stories and not others. In fact, we have a responsibility to choose the stories we believe all the time. 

I read somewhere: “It built on the mystical ideas of the Swiss psychoanalyst Carl Jung, active at the start of the 20th century, whose theories are now mostly of historical interest.” It’s not that Jung’s stories are somehow less true now, it’s that we like different stories, maybe because of the Zeitgeist. And maybe for some, Jung’s stories are what they will like and need, what will be useful to them.

We can manipulate our thoughts, such as in sports, where positive self talk is critical for good performance. 

Politics and economics are all about stories. Especially in economics, you can’t escape the feeling that you can always add something to the story to conclude something different. Ballots are stories that can be the opposite of where the money goes. Asking which is right might be moot. “Truth” is slippery.

Goebbels as a master story teller, for example in Dresden, where he said 200,000 dead instead of 25,000, which split up the allies about area bombing. He also realized people didn’t want to hear the truth, but simple things that seemed to resolve their problems when he demonized the Jews.

We don’t need strong AI. Intelligence is not well defined, so the target is a smoke screen rather than a real thing. It’s far away. And instead of this lofty goal, we just need better tools. Why produce artificial humans? If they are to be like us, it’s not really useful. If they are us + something we can’t do, all we really is the something we can’t do, i.e. again, we just need more and better tools. There are plenty of humans already, and they can be very cheap, and very good at tasks for which AI is still not usable. 
