---
title: Physics without mathematics - 2?
date: 2021-07-14 18:35 PST
category: Epistemology
tags: [raw]
summary: 
---
The Hungarian-American theoretical physicist Eugene Wigner (1902 - 1995), Nobel prize winner in 1963 “for his contributions to the theory of the atomic nucleus and the elementary particles, particularly through the discovery and application of fundamental symmetry principles” wrote a famous paper in 1960 with the title “The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences” (Communications in Pure and Applied Mathematics, Vol. 13, No. I, February 1960). The first point in this paper is “that the enormous usefulness of mathematics in the natural sciences is something bordering on the mysterious and that there is no rational explanation for it”. This prompted me to think about the relation between physics and mathematics, and to ask myself in which sense there could be anything mysterious, unreasonable or irrational in that relation. It led me to the following thoughts: 1. Physics does not essentially or necessarily need mathematics ; 2. It is not clear what mathematics actually is today given that it is so varied and flexible ; 3. That versatility is a good explanation for the fact that mathematics is effective in the natural sciences.

Does physics really need mathematics?
I would like to make the point that physics does not fundamentally, essentially, or necessarily need mathematics. Physics is our human endeavor to explain the world around us, based on the exploitation of regularities that we do observe in various phenomena, such as the revolution of the planets around the Sun, or the fall of apples from trees. We talk of laws of Nature for these regularities, and these laws are valuable to us because they are a way to put some order in our percepts of the world around us, and they can be used to predict the future - for example the laws of mechanics can be used to predict the trajectory of a cannon ball. Our understanding of Nature is based on natural laws. Those laws are invariably quantitative and rely on mathematics, because it is easy and efficient to start counting the days, measuring lengths, then adding and subtracting those quantities… it seems almost unavoidable that quantification would arise when you start observing Nature. Mathematics, at least simple, applied mathematics seems to inevitably follow. And mathematics has served us so well in that endeavor that some are under the impression that Nature is mathematical in a strong sense and that there is no other way than mathematics to understand the world. 

But as a thought experiment, let’s imagine a world where the physicists do not even have the concept of number. For some reason, they do not count anything, and have no mathematical concept. Granted that is a bit far-fetched, as counting the days for the purposes of the calendar, or measuring distances or areas for practical purposes seems so natural, but it is not a logical impossibility. Our physicists would, instead of going the quantitative path, build models of phenomena and theories to understand their world using analogical devices. For example, they would represent the solar system using a scale model with little globes revolving around a bigger globe representing the Sun. They would fit that scale model till it conforms to the actual motions of the planets. Similarly, they could build machines with gears, pulleys, levers … that they would adjust precisely to perfectly model any physical phenomenon. The key to making such analog models would be to fit them to natural phenomena, via trial and error, since  the physicists would not have access to any sort of number. There is again no logical impossibility here, and this is nothing new and has been done historically, although with the help of mathematics in a quantitative context. But it is important to realize two points about these machines: 1. there is nothing to prevent these machines from being arbitrarily complex, with any number of degrees of freedom ; 2. nothing logically prevents these machines from being perfectly adjusted to exactly replicate any natural phenomenon, and to make perfect predictions, just via a process of trial and error, without any mathematics. Finding the exact match of the gears to replicate planetary motion, for example, might take some time, and more complex phenomena might require even more time to fit, but there is nothing that logically prevents the possibility of that fit. 

Mathematics does not appear to be necessary to model the world after all, or even to abstract out laws from observed regularities, if you can build accurate analog models and have the time to fit them by observation and trial and error. This argument also shows that the natural world is not necessarily mathematical, “necessarily” referring here to the inevitability in the Greek ἀνάγκη. We just happen to have developed mathematics because it is extremely convenient, but one cannot derive from that usefulness that mathematics is necessary, nor that the natural world is particularly mathematical in design. We cannot be blinded by the usefulness of mathematics to the point of irrationally believing that “Nature is mathematical”. This is probably very important for the enterprise of understanding the natural world, as we must not be slaves to mathematics, but to observation. Observation comes first in physics, and should guide the mathematical objects to use, and new mathematics might have developed to satisfy the needs of observation. Mathematics needs to be as flexible as required to model natural phenomena. And physicists have employed progressively more elaborate mathematical, from simple numbers to represent distances, speeds and accelerations for example, to vectors to represent forces, then tensors to represent stress. Complex numbers were brought to bear when convenient to describe wave phenomena. But there is actually no reason that mathematics will always be able to supply enough objects to help physics. Maybe there will come a point where we will not have enough mathematical concepts to continue explaining the world (such a point might have been reached already, at least temporarily in the case of reconciling quantum mechanics and general relativity, although this is highly speculative).

How well does mathematics serve physics?
I would also point out that mathematics has actually not always served physics very well, or at least that the relation of mathematics to physics is more complicated than would appear at first sight. Let’s take just the example of renormalization in quantum electrodynamics (QED), a physical theory that describes interactions between charged particles. This theory started in the 1920s in an attempt by physicist Paul Dirac to describe matter and light interactions. The same Dirac had been very successful at using mathematics to predict a new type of particle, the positron, which appeared as an unexpected negative energy solution in a mathematical model - this is the kind of event that leads people to think that mathematical is “unreasonably effective” in mathematics. On the other hand, physicists routinely drop “non-physical” solutions that arise from solving equations, whenever it suits them. Mathematics is quite fickle in sometimes giving us new physics, and sometimes not, it is by no means a sure thing. But in QED, when using one of their favorite mathematical tools, perturbation theory, to calculate other rates of processes involving photons and (relativistic) charged particles, physicists ran into a serious difficulty: the mathematics yielded infinite quantities. Higher order terms in the expansions of perturbation theory, invariably yielded non-physical infinities. In the 1930, these difficulties propagated to quantum field theory (QFT), which also encountered severe divergences. This problem was solved initially in QED by ignoring the offending quantities, but later got a definitive solution with the concept of the renormalization group in the 1970s (which in turn enabled the so-called Standard Model, which describes all particle interactions, but does not include gravity). A different part of mathematics was brought to bear on the problem, where the mathematics used in the first attempt resulted in difficulties. This is a gross simplification, and the history of QED and QFT in the middle of the 20th century is extremely complex with many detours, but this pattern is repeating today, where new mathematics in string theory may be required to bring into one model gravity and particles. And this time, it is said that it is not just a matter of finding another area of mathematics to exploit, but that new mathematics itself will need to be invented. In the end, we see that the relation between physics and mathematics is quite tortured: some parts of mathematics have proved not so useful to physics, while mathematics on the other hand has always been able, more or less, to provide enough tools for physicists, even if the physicists can have difficulties finding the mathematics they need. We also realize that it might be hard to pinpoint what we mean by “mathematics” if some mathematics yield infinites while others cure those infinities. Is mathematics one thing? Many things? What is it exactly?

A point could be made this is all the same mathematics.

What is mathematics anyway?
Wigner takes for granted that we know what “mathematics” is. Do we? I will take the position that modern mathematics is a purely human construct, closely related to logic, that has historically been useful to solve some concrete problems (such as measuring superficies, counting money …), but that the ties to concrete problems have been severed in modern practice, or at least are not fundamental to mathematics anymore. For example, when Evariste Galois worked out the theory of groups in the 19th century, there was no immediate, practical purpose to his interest. Today, pure mathematicians in the mathematics departments of Academia do not carry out experiment to check their theorems, and mathematics can be taught from an abstract point of view - functional analysis for example, and even differential equations, can be studied in complete abstraction from any concrete situation. As another example, Alexander Grothendieck did not develop algebraic geometry because of any concrete problem to solve, or by relying on any physical analogy. His Seminar de Geometrie Algebrique comprises thousands of pages of pure abstraction with no reference whatsoever to anything tangible, as if pure intellectual concepts had been conjured up from nothingness to populate a dense web of formal proofs in an esoteric language. Few people actually get to see that side of mathematics, but it does exist, and is the realm of many mathematicians.

Mathematics is not about the natural world
Mathematics does not need any reference or connection to the natural world - the relation of mathematics to the natural wold is not one of necessity, just as there is no absolute necessity in the use of mathematics by physics. Mathematics is a form of abstract reasoning that takes a set of propositions as true by definition, and deduces consequences from these axioms using rules of logic. This form of reasoning started in Euclid’s Elements, a mathematical treatise in 300 BC where all the propositions form an unbreakable logical chain from the axioms. This pattern continues to form the method of mathematics to this day. But the axioms do not have to relate to the natural world. They are arbitrary, and mathematicians are free to construct and explore deductive systems from any initial set of axioms. This freeing of the mathematician from the limited natural world gained speed in the 19th century and early 20th century, where surprising new results and contradictions, often related to the concept of the infinite (Russell’s paradox for example), prompted a need to establish mathematics on stronger logical foundations. Work on foundations required making previously implicit assumptions explicit, in terms of axioms as well as logical processes used to derive theorems. Semantics related to the natural world were less and less needed for the mathematician to carry out logical inferences from arbitrary axioms. 

As a prominent example, Lobachevsky and Bolyai in the 1820s explored new geometries, deductively, by taking into their set of initial axioms the negation of one of Euclid’s axioms about parallel lines. Nowadays in abstract algebra, mathematicians study both commutative and non-commutative algebra, where the property of commutativity (multiplication commutes: 2x3 = 3x2, but subtraction does not: 3 - 2 != 2 - 3, and nor does putting shoes and socks on does not commute because the order you put them on yields different results) is granted or denied in the initial axioms. But what is remarkable is that not only the axioms can be varied arbitrarily, but even the logic used to deduce theorems is somewhat flexible. For example, in intuitionistic mathematics for example, the principle of the excluded middle (that for any proposition, it is either true or false) is itself rejected. Roughly speaking, constructivists require a concrete algorithm to construct any mathematical object claimed to exist, rejecting the classic proof by contradiction as insufficient (“there must be such an object, although we have no idea how to show an instance”, as opposed to “here is an example of such an object”). The departure from classical logic is even more pronounced in further logical systems such as paraconsistent logic, which attempts to reason productively in the presence of inconsistencies. The point here is that mathematics and the logic that subtend it have become incredibly flexible as tools of reasoning, not only admitting arbitrary systems of axioms, but even shape-shifting between different basic mechanisms of reasoning if needed. It is not a given which laws  of reasoning we should use, which system of logic, and we have become quite adept at varying our methods of reasoning and just agreeing that reasoning that follows some explicit rules is valid reasoning in that system. Which is a serious issue: what system of logic should we use in physics? Is there one that’s more “real” than the others? In fact, we only need one that explains more phenomena, or we might need two, or more. Who said Nature would follow one logic? Which one anyway? That echoes the QM/GR fracture, but broadens it, since the QM/GR fracture is all inside of classical mathematics - only one set of axioms needed. But as a generalization, maybe Nature obeys different logics depending on scale. 

A point could be made that the rules of the reasoning are part of the axioms, so that essentially, the mathematician can change axioms ad libitum.

Today, mathematics has been freed from its ties to the natural world. But that can also lead to the surprise that maths, in the end, has no reason to apply to the natural world. We have seen above that it does not apply straightforwardly to the natural world anyway, as the physicist requires more and more sophisticated mathematics, that has been somewhat forthcoming so far, although there is no guarantee this happy arrangement will persist forever. 

Mathematics is successful because it is very versatile
The flexibility found in mathematics, where, as we have seen, the axioms can be changed arbitrarily, makes it difficult to pinpoint exactly what mathematics is today. Wigner probably had in mind classical mathematics, based on classical logic, when he wrote his 1960 essay on mathematics and the natural sciences, but mathematics is actually much more than that. And even classical mathematics has already proven to be very flexible to describe the natural world. We have progressively increased the complexity of the mathematical objects to suit our needs to describe and model nature, from the integer to the rational numbers, to vectors and tensors when we needed to represent forces, to vector spaces of functions in for the needs of quantum mechanics. But when we use, say, complex numbers in quantum mechanics, hat does not mean that Nature is intrinsically hiding complex numbers in its particles, but merely that we can imagine numbers with enough strange behavior to bend to the observations we make in the quantum world. And if tomorrow complex numbers are not enough for physics, we’ll roll out another kind of mathematical object, or a collection of them, study their properties and use that, or just find in the vast stores of mathematics the objects that fit our current understanding of Nature. And if some contradiction arises, we might even go to paraconsistent logic and continue reasoning about the Natural world. So, the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics does not mean much, because mathematics is too flexible to be defined. What is amazing is that we believe there are some regularities in Nature, or that we can conjure up stories that we share about those regularities. The fact that we tell these stories in the language of mathematics is just a mere convenience. 

We can be hopeful that we will be able to alter the axioms in the future too. 
We can ask if there are limits to changing the axioms. What are the laws of thought that we cannot negotiate, lest we would lose understanding.

Stories, and more stories, what does it mean to be rational?
There is a movement towards the explicit, but stories are changeable.
So we have a tool that is not necessary, and at the same time very flexible, that we apply to try and understand Nature in physics. 
When we say we want to understand Nature, in fact, we want to talk to ourselves, tell ourselves a story that explains what we see and helps us act in the world. We are very flexible with the story, as witnessed by the hoops through which mathematics can be bent to whatever form we want. We want a consistent, effective story, that is universal, which means, that we all agree to it, and if we do not, that we make explicit the choices, introduce new objects or axioms, so that we can recover agreement amongst ourselves. We have biases, such as wanting a simple, unique story, which Nature doesn’t care about. Maths is indispensable because it’s the language of universality amongst ourselves. But it’s not a miracle that it is effective, there is nothing magic, and we did evolve the tool to fit the explanatory needs, such as when going to non-Euclidean geometry. Nothing magical or unreasonably efficient, unless by that is meant that the tool is so powerful and flexible that it will bend over backwards for the needs, as long as we preserve agreement among ourselves - which we call “universality” but should be called “inter-subjectivism”, or have an explicit process to convince each other - listing axioms and saying which rules are allowed to play with the axioms, to accommodate any kind of geometry. 
